Add `plone.autoform` documentation for classic UI (#1571)
plone/documentation: docs/classic-ui/forms.md

If your form is not bound to an object (such as a Dexterity object), set `ignoreContext = True`.

(classic-ui-forms-autoform-label)=

> ## Controlling form presentation

Reviewer: Don't use -ing suffix for active verbs in headings.

```suggestion

## Control form presentation
```

Directives can be specified in the schema to control aspects of form presentation.

> ### Changing a field's display mode

Reviewer 2: chapter: widgets feels more like the right place, see explanations below.

> ### Changing a field's display mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Change a field's display mode
```

> A field's widget can be displayed in several "modes":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A field's widget can be displayed in several modes:
```

* input - allows the user to enter data into the field
* display - a read-only indication of the field's value

> * hidden - a record of the field's value that is included only in the HTML source

Reviewer: Style guide suggestions.

- Use `-` for list items.
- Indent 4 spaces.

This is more of a definition list, than a list.

```suggestion
`hidden`
:   A record of the field's value that is included only in the HTML source
```

Would you please apply the definition list pattern to these list items?

The mode can be controlled using the `mode` directive.

```python
    from plone.supermodel import model
    from plone.autoform import directives as form

    class IMySchema(model.Schema):

        form.mode(secret='hidden')
        form.mode(IEditForm, secret='input')
        secret = schema.TextLine(
            title=u"Secret",
            default=u"Secret stuff (except on edit forms)"
            )
```

> In this case the mode for the `secret` field is set to 'hidden' for most forms,

Reviewer: Style guide: one line per sentence.
```suggestion
In this case the mode for the `secret` field is set to `hidden` for most forms, but `input` for forms that provide the `IEditForm` interface.
```

> but 'input' for forms that provide the IEditForm interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The corresponding supermodel XML directive is `form:mode`:

```xml
    <field type="zope.schema.TextLine"
            name="secret"
            form:mode="z3c.form.interfaces.IForm:hidden z3c.form.interfaces.IEditForm:input">
        <title>Secret</title>
        <description>Secret stuff (except on edit forms)</description>

>     </field>

Reviewer: Dedent the example to avoid horizontal scrolling.

```

The mode can be specified briefly if it should be the same for all forms:

```xml
    <field type="zope.schema.TextLine"
            name="secret"
            form:mode="hidden">
        <title>Secret</title>
        <description>Secret stuff</description>
    </field>

> ```

Reviewer: Dedent the example to avoid horizontal scrolling.

> In other words, `form:mode` may be either a single mode, or a space-separated

Reviewer: One sentence per line.

Inline literal.

```suggestion
In other words, `form:mode` may be either a single mode, or a space-separated list of `form_interface:mode` pairs.
```

> list of form_interface:mode pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Omitting fields

Reviewer 2: chapter: schema feels more like the right place, see explanations below.

> ### Omitting fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Omit fields
```

A field can be omitted entirely from all forms, or from some forms,
using the `omitted` and `no_omit` directives. In this example,
the `dummy` field is omitted from all forms, and the `edit_only`
field is omitted from all forms except those that provide the

> IEditForm interface:

Reviewer: One sentence per line, and make IEditForm an inline literal:

```
`IEditForm`
```

```python
    from z3c.form.interfaces import IEditForm
    from plone.supermodel import model
    from plone.autoform import directives as form

    class IMySchema(model.Schema):

        form.omitted('dummy')
        dummy = schema.Text(
            title=u"Dummy"
            )

        form.omitted('edit_only')
        form.no_omit(IEditForm, 'edit_only')
        edit_only = schema.TextLine(
            title = u'Only included on edit forms',
            )

> ```

Reviewer: Replace `'` with `"`, per Black.

In supermodel XML, this can be specified as:

```xml
    <field type="zope.schema.TextLine"
           name="dummy"
           form:omitted="true">
        <title>Dummy</title>
    </field>

    <field type="zope.schema.TextLine"
           name="edit-only"
           form:omitted="z3c.form.interfaces.IForm:true z3c.form.interfaces.IEditForm:false">
        <title>Only included on edit form</title>
    </field>

> ```

Reviewer: Dedent example

> `form:omitted` may be either a single boolean value, or a space-separated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`form:omitted` may be either a single boolean value, or a space-separated list of `form_interface:boolean` pairs.
```

> list of form_interface:boolean pairs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ### Re-ordering fields

Reviewer 2: chapter: schema feels more like the right place, see explanations below.

> ### Re-ordering fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Reorder fields
```

A field's position in the form can be influenced using the `order_before`
and `order_after` directives. In this example, the `not_last` field

> is placed before the `summary` field even though it is defined afterward:

Reviewer: One sentence per line.

```python
    from plone.supermodel import model
    from plone.autoform import directives as form

    class IMySchema(model.Schema):

        summary = schema.Text(
            title=u"Summary",
            description=u"Summary of the body",
            readonly=True
            )

        form.order_before(not_last='summary')
        not_last = schema.TextLine(
            title=u"Not last",
            )

> ```

Reviewer: Replace `'` with `"`, per Black.

> The value passed to the directive may be either '*' (indicating before or after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value passed to the directive may be either `*` (indicating before or after
```

all fields) or the name of another field. Use `'.fieldname'` to refer to

> field in the current schema or a base schema. Prefix with the schema name (e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
field in the current schema or a base schema. Prefix with the schema name (for example,
```

> `'IDublinCore.title'`) to refer to a field in another schema. Use an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`IDublinCore.title`) to refer to a field in another schema. Use an
```

unprefixed name to refer to a field in the current or the default schema for

> the form.

Reviewer: One sentence per line.

In supermodel XML, the directives are called `form:before` and `form:after`.
For example:

```xml
    <field type="zope.schema.TextLine"
           name="not_last"
           form:before="*">
        <title>Not last</title>
    </field>
```

> ### Organizing fields into fieldsets

Reviewer 2: chapter: schema feels more like the right place, see explanations below.

Fields can be grouped into fieldsets, which will be rendered within an HTML
`<fieldset>` tag. In this example the `footer` and `dummy` fields
are placed within the `extra` fieldset:

```python
    from plone.supermodel import model
    from plone.autoform import directives as form

    class IMySchema(model.Schema):

        model.fieldset('extra',
            label=u"Extra info",
            fields=['footer', 'dummy']
            )

        footer = schema.Text(
            title=u"Footer text",
            )

        dummy = schema.Text(
            title=u"Dummy"
            )

> ```

Reviewer: Replace `'` with `"`, per Black.

> In supermodel XML fieldsets are specified by grouping fields within a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In supermodel XML, fieldsets are specified by grouping fields within a
```

> `<fieldset>` tag:

Reviewer: One sentence per line.

```xml
  <fieldset name="extra" label="Extra info">
      <field name="footer" type="zope.schema.TextLine">
          <title>Footer text</title>
      </field>
      <field name="dummy" type="zope.schema.TextLine">
          <title>Dummy</title>
      </field>
  </fieldset>

> ```

Reviewer: Dedent

> ### Changing a field's widget

Reviewer 2: this is already covert in the widgets chapter and fits better there.
In general, we should try to place individual parts of autoform docs into there fitting chapters.
Could be anything from schemas, fields, widgets to forms and content types.
As content types and forms are both sharing schemas, fields and widgets, I would first try to fit in one of those and reference it from forms and content types where it make sense.

Reviewer: I agree with @MrTango. This section already exists in https://6.docs.plone.org/backend/widgets.html#changing-a-field-s-widget. I won't review its content, as the existing content has already been reviewed and deployed.

        human = schema.Bool(
            title = u'Are you human?',
            )
```

You can also pass widget parameters to control attributes of the
widget. For example, here we keep the default widget, but
set a CSS class:

```python
    from plone.supermodel import model
    from plone.autoform import directives as form
    from z3c.form.browser.radio import RadioWidget

    class IMySchema(model.Schema):
        form.widget('human', klass='annoying')
        human = schema.Bool(
            title = u'Are you human?',
            )
```

In supermodel XML the widget is specified using a `<form:widget>` tag, which
can have its own elements specifying parameters::

```xml
    <field name="human" type="zope.schema.TextLine">
        <title>Are you human?</title>
        <form:widget type="z3c.form.browser.radio.RadioWidget">
            <klass>annoying</klass>
        </form:widget>
    </field>
```

Note: In order to be included in the XML representation of a schema,
widget parameters must be handled by a WidgetExportImportHandler utility.
There is a default one which handles the attributes defined in
`z3c.form.browser.interfaces.IHTMLFormElement`.

> ### Protect a field with a permission

Reviewer 2: chapter: fields feels more like the right place for this with a reference from here maybe.

By default, fields are included in the form regardless of the user's
permissions. Fields can be protected using the `read_permission`
and `write_permission` directives. The read permission is checked when
the field is in display mode, and the write permission is checked when
the field is in input mode. The permission should be given with its

> Zope 3-style name (i.e. cmf.ManagePortal rather than 'Manage portal').

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zope 3-style name (such as `cmf.ManagePortal` instead of `Manage portal`).
```

In this example, the `secret` field is protected by the
`cmf.ManagePortal` permission as both a read and write permission.
This means that in both display and input modes, the field will
only be included in the form for users who have that permission:

> 

Reviewer: All the above, one sentence per line.

```python
    from plone.supermodel import model
    from plone.autoform import directives as form

    class IMySchema(model.Schema):
        form.read_permission(secret='cmf.ManagePortal')
        form.write_permission(secret='cmf.ManagePortal')
        secret = schema.TextLine(
            title = u'Secret',
            )
```

In supermodel XML the directives are `security:read-permission` and

> `security:write-permission`:

Reviewer: One sentence per line.

```xml
    <field type="zope.schema.TextLine"
           name="secret"
           security:read-permission="cmf.ManagePortal"
           security:write-permission="cmf.ManagePortal">
        <title>Secret</title>
    </field>

> ```

Reviewer: Dedent both above code examples

## Display Forms

Sometimes rather than rendering a form for data entry, you want to display
stored values based on the same schema. This can be done using a "display form."
The display form renders each field's widget in "display mode," which means
that it shows the field value in read-only form rather than as a form input.

To use the display form, create a view that extends `WidgetsView` like this:

```python
    from plone.autoform.view import WidgetsView

    class MyView(WidgetsView):
        schema = IMySchema
        additionalSchemata = (ISchemaOne, ISchemaTwo,)

        # ...

> ```

Reviewer: Dedent.

To render the form, do not override `__call__()`. Instead, either implement
the `render()` method, set an `index` attribute to a page template or
other callable, or use the `template` attribute of the `<browser:page />`
ZCML directive when registering the view.

In the template, you can use the following variables:

> * `view/w` is a dictionary of all widgets, including those from non-default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `view/w` is a dictionary of all widgets, including those from non-default
```

  fieldsets (by contrast, the `widgets` variable contains only those
  widgets in the default fieldset). The keys are the field names, and the
  values are widget instances. To render a widget (in display mode), you can
  do `tal:replace="structure view/w/myfield/render" />`.

> * `view/fieldsets` is a dictionary of all fieldsets (not including the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `view/fieldsets` is a dictionary of all fieldsets (not including the
```

>   default fieldset, i.e. those widgets not placed into a fieldset). They keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  default fieldset, in other words, those widgets not placed into a fieldset. The keys
```

  are the fieldset names, and the values are the fieldset form instances,
  which in turn have variables like `widgets` given a list of all widgets.

> 

Reviewer: One sentence per line, all the above.
